---
title: Counter Contract
description: Code-along tutorial for creating a simple counter contract on Aztec.
sidebar_position: 0
---

import Image from "@theme/IdealImage";

In this guide, we will create our first Aztec.nr smart contract. We will build a simple private counter, where you can keep your own private counter - so no one knows what ID you are at or when you increment! This contract will get you started with the basic setup and syntax of Aztec.nr, but doesn't showcase all of the awesome stuff Aztec is capable of.

This tutorial is compatible with the Aztec version `#include_aztec_version`. Install the correct version with `aztec-up -v #include_version_without_prefix`. Or if you'd like to use a different version, you can find the relevant tutorial by clicking the version dropdown at the top of the page.

## Prerequisites

- You have followed the [quickstart](../../../getting_started_on_sandbox.md)
- Running Aztec Sandbox
- Installed [Noir LSP](../../guides/local_env/installing_noir_lsp.md) (optional)

## Set up a project

Run this to create a new contract project:

```bash
aztec-nargo new --contract counter
```

Your structure should look like this:

```tree
.
|-counter
| |-src
| | |-main.nr
| |-Nargo.toml
```

The file `main.nr` will soon turn into our smart contract!

Add the following dependencies to `Nargo.toml` under the autogenerated content:

```toml
[dependencies]
aztec = { git="https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-packages/", tag="#include_aztec_version", directory="noir-projects/aztec-nr/aztec" }
value_note = { git="https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-packages/", tag="#include_aztec_version", directory="noir-projects/aztec-nr/value-note"}
easy_private_state = { git="https://github.com/AztecProtocol/aztec-packages/", tag="#include_aztec_version", directory="noir-projects/aztec-nr/easy-private-state"}
```

## Define the functions

Go to `main.nr`, and replace the boilerplate code with this contract initialization:

```rust
#include_code setup /docs/examples/tutorials/counter_contract/src/main.nr raw
}
```

This defines a contract called `Counter`.

## Imports

We need to define some imports.

Write this inside your contract, ie inside these brackets:

```rust
pub contract Counter {
    // imports go here!
}
```

#include_code imports /docs/examples/tutorials/counter_contract/src/main.nr rust

- `use aztec::macros::{functions::{initializer, private, utility}, storage::storage},`
  Imports the macros needed to define function types (`initializer`, `private`, and `utility`) and the `storage` macro for declaring contract storage structures.

- `protocol_types::{address::AztecAddress, traits::ToField},`
  Brings in `AztecAddress` (used to identify accounts/contracts) and traits for converting values to and from field elements, necessary for serialization and formatting inside Aztec.

- `state_vars::Map,`
  Brings in `Map`, used for creating state mappings, like our counters.

- `use easy_private_state::EasyPrivateUint;`
  Imports a wrapper to manage private integer-like state variables (ie our counter), abstracting away notes.

## Declare storage

Add this below the imports. It declares the storage variables for our contract. We are going to store a mapping of values for each `AztecAddress`.

#include_code storage_struct /docs/examples/tutorials/counter_contract/src/main.nr rust

## Keep the counter private

Now we’ve got a mechanism for storing our private state, we can start using it to ensure the privacy of balances.

Let’s create a constructor method to run on deployment that assigns an initial count to a specified owner. This function is called `initialize`, but behaves like a constructor. It is the `#[initializer]` decorator that specifies that this function behaves like a constructor. Write this:

#include_code constructor /docs/examples/tutorials/counter_contract/src/main.nr rust

This function accesses the counts from storage. Then it assigns the passed initial counter to the `owner`'s counter privately using `at().add()`.

We have annotated this and other functions with `#[private]` which are ABI macros so the compiler understands it will handle private inputs.

## Incrementing our counter

Now let’s implement the `increment` function we defined in the first step.

#include_code increment /docs/examples/tutorials/counter_contract/src/main.nr rust

The `increment` function works very similarly to the `constructor`, but instead directly adds 1 to the counter rather than passing in an initial count parameter.

## Getting a counter

The last thing we need to implement is the function in order to retrieve a counter. In the `getCounter` we defined in the first step, write this:

#include_code get_counter /docs/examples/tutorials/counter_contract/src/main.nr rust

This is a `utility` function which is used to obtain the counter information outside of a transaction. We retrieve a reference to the `owner`'s `counter` from the `counters` Map. The `get_balance` function then operates on the owner's counter. This yields a private counter that only the private key owner can decrypt.

## Compile

Now we've written a simple Aztec.nr smart contract, we can compile it.

### Compile the smart contract

In `./counter/` directory, run these commands:

```bash
aztec-nargo compile # generate contract artifacts
aztec-postprocess-contract # transpile contracts and generate verification keys
```

The first command compiles your Noir contract and creates a `target` folder with a `.json` artifact inside. The second command processes these artifacts for use with Aztec (transpiling for the AVM and generating verification keys). Do not worry if you see some warnings - Aztec is in fast development and it is likely you will see some irrelevant warning messages.

After compiling and processing, you can generate a typescript class using `aztec codegen` command.

In the same directory, run this:

```bash
aztec codegen -o src/artifacts target
```

You can now use the artifact and/or the TS class in your Aztec.js!

## Next Steps

### Optional: Learn more about concepts mentioned here

- [Functions and annotations like `#[private]`](../../concepts/smart_contracts/functions/function_transforms.md#private-functions)
